---
title: Reacting with RxJS
type: guide
order: 201
---

This chapter covers
* Looking at streams as the main unit of work
* Understanding functional programming’s influence on RxJS
* Identifying different types of data sources and how to handle them
* Modeling data sources as RxJS observables
* Consuming observables with observers

When writing code in an object-oriented way, we’re taught to decompose problems into components, interactions, and states. This breakdown occurs iteratively and on many levels, with each part further subdivided into more components, until at last we arrive at a set of cohesive classes that implement a well-defined set of interactions. Hence, in the object-oriented (OO) approach, classes are the main unit of work. Every time a component is created, it will have state associated with it, and the manipulation of that state in a structured fashion is what advances application logic. For example, consider a typical online banking website. Banking systems contain modules that encapsulate not only the business logic associated with withdrawing, depositing, and transferring money but also domain models that store and manage other properties, such as account and user profiles. Manipulating this state (its behavior) causes the data to transform into the desired output. In other words, behavior is driven by the continuous mutation of a system’s state. If such a system is designed using object-oriented programming, the units of work are the classes responsible for modeling accounts, users, money, and others.

RxJS programming works a bit differently. In reactive programming in general, the fundamental unit of work is the stream.

In this chapter, we ask you to think in terms of streams (think reactively) and design code that, instead of holding onto data, allows data to flow through and applies transformations along the way until it reaches your desired state. You’ll learn how to handle different types of data sources, whether static or dynamic, as RxJS streams that use a consistent computational model based on the Observable data type. Unlike using other JavaScript libraries, however, using RxJS in your application means much more than implementing new APIs; it means that you must approach your problems not as the sum of the set of states manipulated by methods in classes but as a sequence of data that continuously travels from the producers to the consumers through a set of operators that implement your desired behavior.

This way of thinking places the notion of time at the forefront; this notion runs as the undercurrent through the components of an RxJS stream and causes data to be never stored but rather transiently flowing. Relating this to a real-world physical water stream, you can think of the data source as the top of the stream and the data consumer as the bottom of the stream. Hence, data is always traveling downstream, in a single direction, like water in a river, and along the way you can have control dams in charge of transforming the nature of this stream. Thinking this way will help you understand how data should move through an application.

This is not to say that this understanding will come easily—like any new skill, it must be built up over time and through iterative application of the concepts. As you saw in the pseudo streams example in chapter 1, the notion of data in motion versus data kept in variables is a difficult one for most people to wrap their head around. In this book, we’ll provide you with the necessary tools to ease this learning curve. To begin building your toolkit, this chapter lays the groundwork to help you better understand streams. Many of the basic principles behind RP derive from functional programming, so let’s start there.

## Functional programming as the pillar of reactive programming

The abstractions that support RP are built on top of FP, so FP is the foundation for RP. Much of the hype around RP derives from the development communities and the industry realizing that FP offers a compelling way to design your code. This is why it’s important for you to have at least a basic understanding of the FP principles. If you have a solid background in functional programming, you’re free to skip this section, but we recommend you read along because it will help you better understand some of the design decisions behind RxJS.

Just like in chapter 1, we ask you to take another quick glance at the main website for the Reactive Extensions project (http://reactivex.io). In it, you’ll find the following definition:

ReactiveX is a combination of the best ideas from the Observer pattern, the Iterator pattern, and functional programming.

You learned about the main components of the observer pattern in chapter 1 (producer and consumer); now you’ll learn the about the other parts that gave rise to the Rx project, which are functional programming and iterators. Here’s a diagram (figure 2.1) that better illustrates the relationship between these paradigms.

Let’s begin by exploring the basics of FP.

Figure 2.1 The RP paradigm builds and extends from FP. Also, it leverages commonly known design patterns such as iterator and observer.

### Functional programming

Functional programming is a software paradigm that emphasizes the use of functions to create programs that are declarative, immutable, and side effect–free. Did you trip over the word immutable? We agree with you; the notion of a program that doesn’t ever change state is a bit mind bending. After all, that’s why we put data in variables and modify them to our heart’s content. All of the object-oriented or procedural application code you’ve written so far relies on changing and passing variables back and forth to solve problems. So how can you accomplish the same goals without doing this? Take the example of a clock. When a clock goes from 1:00 p.m. to 2:00 p.m., it’s undoubtedly changing, isn’t it? But to frame this from a functional point of view, we argue that instead of a single clock instance mutating every second, it’s best to return new clock instances every second. Theoretically, both would arrive at the same time, and both would give you a single state at the end.

RxJS borrows numerous principles from FP, particularly function chaining, lazy evaluation, and the notion of using an abstract data type to orchestrate data flows. These are some of the design decisions that drive the development of RxJS’s stream programming via the Observable data type. Before we dive in, we’ll explain the main parts of the FP definition we just gave and then show you a quick example involving arrays.

To reiterate, functional programs have the following characteristics:

* Declarative—Functional code has a peculiar style, which takes advantage of JavaScript’s higher-order functions to apply specialized business logic. As you’ll see later on, function chains (also known as pipelines) describe data transformation steps in an idiomatic manner. Most people see SQL syntax as a perfect example of declarative code.

* Immutable—An immutable program (and by this we mean any immutable function, module, or whole program) is one that never changes or modifies data after it’s been created or after its variables have been declared. This can be a radical concept to grasp, especially when you’re coming from an OO background. Functional programs treat data as immutable, constant values. A good example of a familiar module is the String type, because none of the operations change the string on which they operate; rather, they all return new strings. A good practice that you’ll see us use throughout the book is to qualify all of our variables with const to create nicely block-scoped immutable variables that can’t be reassigned. This doesn’t solve all the problems of immutability, but it gives you a little extra support when your data and functions are shared globally.

* Side effect–free—Functions with side effects depend on data residing outside its own local scope. A function’s scope is made up of its arguments and any local variables declared within. Interacting with anything outside this (like reading a file, writing to the console, rendering elements on an HTML page, and more) is considered a side effect and should be avoided or, at the very least, isolated. In this book, you’ll learn how RxJS deals with these issues by pushing the effectful computations into the subscribers.

In general, mutations and side effects make functions unreliable and unpredictable. That is to say, if a function alters the contents of an object inadvertently, it will compromise other functions that expect this object to keep its original state. The OO solution to this is to encapsulate state and protect it from direct access from other components of the system. In contrast, FP deals with state by eliminating it, so that your functions can confidently rely on it to run.

For instance, figure 2.2 illustrates the dependency between the two functions doWork() and doMoreWork() through a shared state variable called data.

This coupling presents an issue because doMoreWork now relies on doWork to run first. Two issues may occur:

* The result of doMoreWork() depends entirely on the successful outcome of doWork() and on no other parts of the system changing this variable.

* Unit tests against this function can’t be done in isolation as they should be, so your test results are susceptible to the order in which the test cases are run (in chapter 9, we’ll explore testing in much more detail).

Figure 2.2 Function doWork() is temporarily coupled to doMoreWork() because of the dependency on shared state (side effect). Hence, doWork() must be called before doMoreWork() or the program will cease to work.

Shared variables, especially in the global scope, add to the cognitive load of reasoning about your code because these variables demand that you keep track of them as you trace through it. Another way you can think of global data is as a hidden parameter within all your functions. So the more global the state you have to maintain, the harder it is for you to maintain your code. The example in figure 2.2 is an obvious side effect, but they’re not always this clear. Consider this trivial function that returns the lowest value in a numerical array:

```
const lowest = arr => arr.sort().shift();
```

Although this code may seem harmless to you, it packs a terrible side effect. Can you spot it? This function actually changes the contents of the input array, as shown in the following snippet. So if you used the first element of the array somewhere else, that’s completely gone now:

```
let source = [3,1,9,8,3,7,4,6,5];
let result = lowest(source); //-> 1
console.log(source); //-> [3, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] // The original array changed!
```

The original array changed!

Later on, we’ll talk about a functional library that provides a rich set of functions for working with arrays immutably, so that things like this don’t inadvertently creep up on you.

Matters get worse if you have concurrent asynchronous processes where data structures are shared and used in different components. Because latency is unpredictable, you’d need to either nest your function calls or use some other robust synchronization mechanism to ensure they execute and mutate this state in the right order; otherwise, you’ll experience random and hard-to-troubleshoot bugs.

Fortunately, JavaScript is single threaded, so you don’t need to worry about shared state running through different threads. But as JavaScript developers, we deal quite often with concurrent code when either working with web workers or making simultaneous HTTP calls. Consider the trivial yet frequent use case illustrated in figure 2.3, which involves asynchronous code mixed with synchronous code. This presents a tremendous challenge because the latter assumes that the functions executing before it have completed successfully, which might not necessarily be the case if there’s some latency.

Figure 2.3 Function doAsyncWork() is an example of a remote call that fetches data from the server. Suppose this call has a latency around one second, depending on network conditions. Immediately after, the next function runs doMoreWork(), expecting that a piece of shared data has already been initialized. Because of this latency, the shared data has not been initialized, and the execution of doMoreWork() is compromised.

In this scenario, doAsyncWork() fetches some data from the server, which never completes in a constant amount of time. So doMoreWork() fails to run properly because it reads data that hasn’t yet been initialized. Callbacks and Promises help you solve this problem, so that you don’t have to hardcode your own timeouts in order to anticipate latency. Dealing directly with time is a recipe for disaster because your code will be extremely brittle and hard to maintain and will cause to you to come in to work during a weekend when your application is experiencing slightly more traffic than usual. Working with data immutably, using FP, and the help of an asynchronous library like RxJS can make these timing issues disappear—immutable variables are protected against time. In chapters 4 and 6, we’ll cover timing and synchronization with observables, which offer a much superior solution to this problem.

Even though JavaScript isn’t a pure functional language, with a bit of discipline and the help of the proper libraries you can use it completely functionally. As you learn to use RxJS, we ask that you also begin to embrace a functional coding style; it’s something we believe strongly about and promote in all code samples in this book.

Aside from using const to safeguard the variable’s reference, JavaScript also has support for a versatile array data structure with methods such as map, reduce, filter, and others. These are known as higher-order or first-class functions, and they’re one of the most important functional qualities in the language, allowing you to express JavaScript programs in an idiomatic way. A higher-order function is defined as one that can accept as argument as well as return other functions; they’re used extensively with RxJS, as with any functional data type.

The following listing shows a simple program that takes an array of numbers, extracts the even numbers, computes their squares, and sums their total.

Listing 2.1 Processing collections with map, reduce, and filter

```
const isEven = num => num % 2 === 0;
const square = num => num * num;
const add = (a, b) => a + b;

const arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10];

arr.filter(isEven).map(square).reduce(add);  //-> 220
```

In this example, because these operations are side effect–free, this program will always produce the same value (220), given the same input array.

> Where can I find this code?

> All the code for this book can be found in the RxJS in Action GitHub repository at https://github.com/RxJSInAction. There, you’ll find two subrepositories. Under rxjs-in-action, you’ll find a simple application that contains the code for all individual chapter listings for chapters 1 through 9. All samples are presented as runnable snippets of RxJS code that you can interact with. Also, under the banking-in-action repository, you’ll find our web application that showcases RxJS embedded into a React/Redux architecture. Some of the APIs that we interact with in the book don’t allow cross-origin resource sharing (CORS). The simplest way to get around this is to disable it at the browser level by installing an extension or add-on.

If you imagine for a second having to write this program using a non-functional or imperative approach, you’ll probably need to write a loop, a conditional statement, and a few variables to keep track of things. FP, on the other hand, raises the level of abstraction and encourages a style of declarative coding that clearly states the purpose of a program, describing what it does and not how it does it. Nowhere in this short program is the presence of a loop, if/else, or any imperative control flow mechanism.

One of the main themes in FP that you’ll use as well in RP is programming without loops. In listing 2.1, you took advantage of map, reduce, and filter to hide manual looping constructs—allowing you to implement looping logic through functions’ arguments. Moreover, these functions are also immutable, which means that new arrays are created at each step of the way, keeping the original intact.

If you imagine for a second having to write this program using a non-functional or imperative approach, you’ll probably need to write a loop, a conditional statement, and a few variables to keep track of things. FP, on the other hand, raises the level of abstraction and encourages a style of declarative coding that clearly states the purpose of a program, describing what it does and not how it does it. Nowhere in this short program is the presence of a loop, if/else, or any imperative control flow mechanism.

One of the main themes in FP that you’ll use as well in RP is programming without loops. In listing 2.1, you took advantage of map, reduce, and filter to hide manual looping constructs—allowing you to implement looping logic through functions’ arguments. Moreover, these functions are also immutable, which means that new arrays are created at each step of the way, keeping the original intact.

> Want to learn more about functional programming?

> JavaScript’s Array object has a special place in functional programming because it behaves as an extremely powerful data type called a functor. In a simple sense, functors are containers that can wrap data and expose a mapping method that allows you to immutably apply transformations on this data, as shown by the Array.map() method. As you’ll see learn later on, RxJS streams follow this same functor-like design.

> Functional programming is a huge subject to cover. In this book, we’ll cover only enough of FP to help you to understand and be proficient with RxJS and RP. If you’d like more information about FP and FP topics, you can read about them in detail in Functional Programming in JavaScript (Manning, 2016) by Luis Atencio.

The code shown in listing 2.1, which works well with arrays, also translates to streams. Along the lines of the pseudo Stream data type that we discussed in chapter 1, look at how similarly arrays and streams work when processing some number sequence:

```
Stream([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10])
  .filter(isEven)
  .map(square)
  .reduce(add)
  .subscribe(console.log);  //-> 220
```

You can clearly see how Rx was inspired by FP. All we had to do was wrap the array into a stream and then subscribe to it to listen for the computed values that derive from the sequence of steps declared in the stream’s pipeline. This is the same as saying that streams are containers that you can use to lift data (events) into their context, so that you can apply sequences of operations on this data until reaching your desired outcome. Fortunately, you’re already familiar with this concept from working with arrays for many years. You can lift a value into an array and map any functions to it. Suppose you declare some simple functions on strings like toUpper, slice, and repeat:

```
['rxjs'].map(toUpper).map(slice(0, 2)).map(repeat(2)); //-> 'RXRX'
```

The ancient Greek philosopher Heraclitus once said, “You can never step into the same river twice.” He formulated this statement as part of his doctrine on change and motion being central components of the universe—everything is constantly in motion. This epic realization is what RxJS streams are all about: as data continuously flows and moves through the stream, orchestrated through this is the data type you’re learning about called Stream. Despite being dynamic, Streams are immutable data types. Once a Stream is declared to wrap an array, listen for mouse clicks, or respond to an HTTP call, you can’t mutate it or add a new value to it afterward—you must do it at the time of declaration. Hence, you’re specifying the dynamic behavior of an object or value declaratively and immutably. We’ll revisit this topic a bit more in the next chapter.

Moreover, the business logic of this program is pure and takes advantage of side effect–free functions that are mapped onto the stream to transform the produced data into the desired outcome. The advantage of this is that all side effects are isolated and pushed onto the consumers (logging to the console, in this case). This separation of concerns is ideal and keeps your business logic clean and pure. Figure 2.4 shows the role that the producers and consumers play.

Figure 2.4 Events emitted by producers are pushed through a pipeline of side effect–free functions, which implement the business logic of your program. This data flows to all observers in charge of consuming and displaying it.

Another design principle of streams that’s borrowed from FP is lazy evaluation. Lazy evaluation means that code is never called until actually needed. In other words, functions won’t evaluate until their results are used as part of some other expression. In the following example, the idea is that a stream sits idle until a subscriber (a consumer) is attached to it; only then will it emit the values 1–10:

```
Stream([1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10])
  .filter(isEven)
  .map(square)
  .reduce(add); // Nothing runs here because no subscriber is added.
```

When a subscriber begins listening, the stream will emit events downstream through the pipeline in a single, unidirectional flow from the producer to the consumer. This is beneficial if your functions have side effects because the pipeline runs in a single direction, helping to ensure an orderly execution of your function calls. This is another reason to avoid side effects at all costs, especially when you begin combining multiple streams, because things can revert into the tangled mess that you’re trying to get rid of in the first place. Lazy evaluation is a mandatory requirement for streams because they emit data infinitely to handle mouse movements, key presses, and other asynchronous messages. Otherwise, storing the entire sequence of mouse movements in memory could make your programs crash.

> Reactive Manifesto

> One of the key principles of a reactive system is the ability to stay afloat under varying workloads—known as elasticity. Obviously, this has many architectural and infrastructural implications that extend beyond the scope of this book, but a corollary to this is that the paradigm you use shouldn’t change whether you’re dealing with one, one hundred, or thousands of events. RxJS offers a single computing model to handle finite as well as infinite streams.

> The Reactive Manifesto (http://www.reactivemanifesto.org) was published by a working group that aims at identifying patterns for building reactive systems. It has no direct relation to the Rx libraries, but philosophically there are many points in common.

For instance, without lazy evaluation, code that uses infinite streams like this will cause the application to run out of memory and halt:

```
//1
Stream.range(1, Number.POSITIVE_INFINITY) // Reads infinitely many numbers in memory
  .take(100)
  .subscribe(console.log);
//2
Stream.fromEvent('mousemove') // Listens to all mouse moves the user is performing
  .map(e => [e.clientX, e.clientY])
  .subscribe(console.log);
```

In example 1, lazy evaluation makes the stream smart enough to understand that it will never need to actually run through all the positive numbers infinitely before taking the first 100. And even if the amount of numbers to store is big, streams won’t persistently hold onto data; instead, any data emitted is immediately broadcast to all subscribers at the moment it gets generated. In example 2, imagine if you needed to store in memory the coordinates of all mouse movements on the screen; this could potentially take up a huge amount of memory. Instead of holding onto this data, RxJS lets it flow freely and uses the iterator pattern to traverse any type of data source irrespective of how it’s created.

### The iterator pattern

A key design principle behind RxJS streams is to give you a familiar traversal mechanism, just as you have with arrays. Iterators are used to traverse containers of data in a structure-agnostic way or independent of the underlying data structure used to harness these elements, whether it’s an array, a tree, a map, or even a stream. In addition, this pattern is effective at decoupling the business logic applied at each element from the iteration itself. The goal is to provide a single protocol for accessing each element and moving on to the next, as shown in figure 2.5.

Figure 2.5 Iterators abstract the traversal mechanism, whether a for or a while loop, so that processing any type of data is done in the exact same way.

We’ll explain this pattern briefly now, and later on you’ll see how this applies to streams. The JavaScript ES6 (or ES2015) standard defines the iterator protocol, which allows you to define or customize the iteration behavior of any iterable object. The iterable objects you’re most familiar with are arrays and strings. ES6 added Map and Set. With RxJS, we’ll treat streams as iterable data types as well.

You can make any object iterable by manipulating its underlying iterator. We’ll be using some ES6-specific syntax to show this. Consider an iterator object that traverses an array of numbers and buffers a set amount of contiguous elements. Here, the business logic performed is the buffering itself, which can be useful to group elements together to form numerical sets of any dimension, like the ones illustrated in figure 2.6.

Now let’s see what the code would look like. The next listing shows the internal implementation of this custom iterator, which contains the buffer logic.

Figure 2.6 Using an iterator to display sets of numbers of size 2

Listing 2.2 Custom BufferIterator function

```
function BufferIterator(arr, bufferSize = 2) { // Assigns a default buffer size of 2
  this[Symbol.iterator] = function () { // Overrides the provided array’s iterator mechanism. Symbol.iterator represents the array’s iterator function.
    let nextIndex = 0;
    return {
      next: () => { // The next() function is part of the Iterator interface and marks the next element in the iteration.
        if (nextIndex >= arr.length) {
          return {done: true}; // Returns an object with a done = true property, which causes the iteration mechanism to stop
        } else {
          let buffer = new Array(bufferSize);
          for(let i = 0; i < bufferSize; i++) { // Creates a temporary buffer array to group contiguous elements
            buffer[i] = (arr[nextIndex++]);
          }
          return {value: buffer, done: false}; // Returns the buffered items and a status of done = false, which indicates to the iteration mechanism to continue
        }
      }
    }
  };
}
```

Any clients of this API need only interact with the next() function, as outlined in the class diagram in figure 2.7. The business logic is hidden from the caller, the for...of block, which is the main goal of the iterator pattern.

The next() function in listing 2.2 is used to customize the behavior of the iteration through for...of or any other looping mechanism. As you’ll see later on, RxJS observers also implement a similar interface to signal to the stream to continue emitting elements.

**DID ITERATORS THROW YOU FOR A LOOP?** The ES6 iterator/iterable protocols are powerful features of the language. RxJS development predates this protocol, so it doesn’t use it at its core, but in many ways the pattern is still applied. We don’t use iterators in this book; nevertheless, we recommend you learn about them. You can read more about this protocol here: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Iteration_protocols#iterator.

Figure 2.7 A class diagram (UML) highlighting the components of the iterator pattern. The Iterator interface defines the next() function, which is implemented by any concrete iterator (BufferIterator). Users of this API need only interact with the interface, which is general and applies to any custom traversal mechanism.

Iterators allow you to easily take advantage of the JavaScript runtime to take care of the iteration on your behalf. Following, we show some examples of this using our simple numerical domain. Buffering is built into RxJS, and it’s really useful to gather up a sequence of events and make decisions about the nature of these events or apply additional logic. An example of this is when you need to invoke an expensive operation in response to a sequence of mouse events, like drag and drop. Instead of running expensive code at each mouse position, you buffer a specific number of them and emit a single response, taking all into account. Implementing this yourself would be tricky, because it would involve time management and keeping external state that tracks the frequency and speed with which the user moves the mouse; certainly, you’ll want to delegate this to libraries that understand how to manage all this for you. We’ll examine buffers in more detail in chapter 4. In RxJS, buffers aren’t implemented as in listing 2.2, but it serves to show you an example of how you can buffer data using iterators, which is how you think about these sorts of operations. Here’s our BufferIterator in action:

```
const arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6];
for(let i of new BufferIterator(arr, 2)) { // Buffers two elements at once
    console.log(i);
}
//-> [1, 2] [3, 4] [5, 6]
for(let i of new BufferIterator(arr, 3)) { // Buffers three elements at once. Notice how the iteration mechanism is completely separate from the buffering logic.
    console.log(i);
}
//-> [1, 2, 3] [4, 5, 6]
```

When you subscribe to a stream, you’ll be traversing through many other data sources such as mouse clicks and key presses in the exact same way. Theoretically speaking, because our pseudo Stream type is an iterable object, you could traverse a set of key press events as well with a conventional loop:

```
const stream = Stream(R, x, J, S)[Symbol.iterator](); // Creating a stream that wraps key presses for those four letters
for(let keyEvent of stream) { // Traversing a stream is semantically equivalent to subscribing to it (more on this later).
  console.log(event.keyCode);
}
//-> 82, 120, 74, 83
```

Streams in RxJS also respect the Iterator interface, and subscribers of this stream will listen for all the events contained inside it. As you saw previously, iterators are great at decoupling the iteration mechanism and data being iterated over from the business logic. When data defines the control flow of the program, this is known as data-driven code.

## Stream’s data-driven approach

## Wrapping data sources with Rx.Observable

### Identifying different sources of data

### Creating RxJS observables

### When and where to use RxJS

### To push or not to push

## Consuming data with observers

### The Observer API

### Creating bare observables

### Observable modules

## Summary
